[Music]
this episode's sponsored by Skillshare
hello and welcome history buffs my name
is Nick Hodges and today we're gonna
have a laugh at the death of Stalin
based on the French graphic novel with
the same name this is a movie about the
death and political fallout of one of
the most evil human beings in history
the dictator of the Soviet Union Joseph
Stalin who suffered a fatal stroke on
the 1st of March 1953 oh yeah it also
happens to be a comedy like seriously
this is one of the funniest films have
ever seen and when I started my research
I was shocked to find out how some of
its craziest moment turned out to be
true that was when I knew that I had to
make this into an official review so
over the course of this video I'll be
going to a brief history of Stalin's
rise to power and a reveal of this movie
was at all accurate now for those of you
haven't seen it you may find the idea of
a comedy like this in poor taste but
take it from me you should really give
it a chance I think it does a great job
of being respectful to the period whilst
also being able to satirize it
authentically life is cruel violent and
depressing but sometimes a healthy sense
of humor can make all the difference in
the world even finding in something like
the death of Stalin
[Music]
on the 6th of March 1953 the world was
stunned with the news announcing
Stalin's death marking the end of his 24
year reign of terror that murdered
millions and transformed the Soviet
Union into a superpower while some in
the West celebrated others were more
apprehensive of what might come next
would things change for the better
or even possibly for the worse quiet
there's nothing to celebrate no matter
who it is seemed to be the only one
surprised by his death and it appears
time just finally ran out for the old
cocksucker I'm sorry but if there's one
death you could celebrate it was
definitely Stalin I know that people
like to use Hitler as the perfect
example of true evil but Stalin brags
pretty high up there as well so I don't
think you should be overlooked and I'm
going to explain this chapter exactly
why born in 1878 in the small village of
gory and Georgia which was then part of
the Russian Empire Joseph Stalin was
originally Josef Vissarionovich Yogesh
viele throughout his young adult life he
has seen too many identities but the one
he ultimately went for was Stalin a
Russian word to conceal his Georgian
roots and translated to Man of Steel it
was a title that he would certainly live
up to the reason for these later name
changes was biggest by 1905 he had
joined an underground socialist group
called the Bolsheviks founded by
Vladimir Lenin they promoted the
principles of Marxism through propaganda
upon provoking general unrest mainly
through strikes and protests Stalin
quickly rose through its ranks by
raising vast sums of money all of it
made through criminal means by this
point in his life Stalin was little more
than a common gangster guilty for
extortion kidnapping piracy arson bank
robbery and running protection rackets
to hide from authorities solemn would
use aliases and frequently moved from
place to place despite these precautions
he was often captured and imprisoned for
his crimes before eventually escaping
later from the very beginning he was
regarded by Lenin as a reliable asset to
the cause this helped bring Stalin into
the inner circle and by 1917 the
Bolsheviks had si
power in Russia during the October
Revolution and Stalin found himself in
the Central Committee of the new
communist government but over the years
and despite its loyal service Stalin was
passed over for many of its top jobs the
truth was that Stalin's usefulness as
enforcer was no longer needed
he was rightly seen as an uneducated
violent thug by many of his peers none
more so than Leon Trotsky whom Stalin
hated with an abiding passion
Stalin especially resented Trotsky's
close relationship with Lenin which made
him the second most powerful figure in
the Soviet Union this was the reality
that Stalin was forced to accept for the
next few years that was until 1922 when
Lenin assigned Stalin the role of
general secretary at first glance it
seems like just a desk job but Stalin
was quick to realize its enormous
potential a general secretary was merely
intended to keep the books in order and
set up appointments but this position
also gave him the authority to appoint
Posse members in administrative
positions this allowed him to remove his
rivals and replaced them with his loyal
supporters he could also decide who he
wanted to inform about key appointments
and who not seen just so that the
majority presence in these committees
would always be pushing his agenda this
political maneuvering was not lost on
Lenin but he had suffered a paralyzing
stroke on the 25th of May 1922 fearing
his imminent death he wrote a secret
Testament critiquing all the leading
party members and recommended removing
Joseph Stalin as general secretary of
the communist party when Lenin
eventually died in 1924 Stalin
personally organized a grand funeral in
his honor by leading the procession
Stalin was seen by the people as an
obvious choice for successor one reason
why many Hume added weren't supportive
of Lennon's favorite Protege Leon
Trotsky was because Trotsky was
purposely given the wrong date for the
funeral for the next three years
Stalin's power base continued to grow
and by 1927 Stalin was able to expel
Trotsky from the party forcing to flee
to Mexico and exile until his murder in
1940 at the hands of a Soviet assassin
by 1929 Stalin and Al stood all of his
political rivals making
him the de facto leader keeping the
title of general secretary he turned his
attention to transforming the Soviet
Union into an industrial power reason
why is because the USSR had fallen
behind many of the Western powers with
the majority of people still working the
land as peasants and to fix this
Stalin enacted three aggressive
five-year plans to leap forward his
nations productivity in a shorter time
as possible the agricultural sector was
the first to be radically reformed
through collective farming all of the
world via most successful peasants was
stripped of their lands and were labeled
by Stalin as cool acts 5 million of them
were either exiled to slave labor camps
or executed by local secret police the
remaining peasants were forced to work
on enormous state-run farms where the
bulk of their crops and livestock were
seized by the government and sent to the
big cities to feed factory workers or
were sold abroad this collectivization
was expected to increased food
production but instead it did the exact
opposite across the Soviet Union
millions of agricultural workers
suffered from extreme privation are
consequently died from starvation and
disease anyone found stealing food
either faced imprisonment or a firing
squad
forcing santa resort to cannibalism it's
unknown how many died in this genocide
that's remembered today as the holiday
more but it's believed to be up to 10
million new to the famine was suppressed
in the cities but not even the factory
workers were safe from Stalin's
ruthlessness in an effort to increase
productivity in iron steel oil : more
workers were given extremely high quotas
any worker that continued to fail
meeting them or made mistakes were also
exiled to a work camp or shot now these
were camps also known as gulags provided
the communist government with an endless
supply of slave labor from criminals to
political prisoners men women and in
some cases even children were forced to
work at gunpoint in the most appalling
conditions whether it be by chopping
trees for lumber or mining for coal all
of this was done through grueling 14
hour work days and little protection
against the elements the worst gulags
were in Siberia on the
Arctic Circle where prisoners were
exposed to sub-freezing temperatures
during the winter the most notorious and
dreaded gulag was Kalima according to an
apple bong in a groundbreaking book
gulag the name Kalima deserves to be as
well-known as the name of schvitz food
rations were tightly controlled and only
given to the most productive workers
there was no consideration for the ones
who couldn't keep up as they could
always be replaced this resulted in a
million dying from hunger disease or
even simply exhaustion
despite his barbaric methods Stalin's
plans to modernize the Soviet Union was
beginning to work its achievements often
exaggerated by propaganda always
presented josef stalin as an infallible
leader his portraits were hung in every
factory in every home in schools
children were taught that their loyalty
was to Stalin first and their family
second this indoctrination was
ruthlessly enforced by the NKVD Stalin's
secret police and everyone was expected
to follow this cult of Stalin
to be unwavering in their love and
support for the great leader or else
suffer the consequences an example of
this can be seen with one of Stalin
speeches after he'd finished the whole
room erupted in thunderous applause but
as minute after minute dragged the
applause showed no sign of stopping
since no one dared to be the first in
1934 Stalin further strengthened his
grip on power through an even worse act
of political repression it was triggered
by the death of Sergei Kirov Stalin's
loyal friend and colleague although this
is unconfirmed it is widely believed
that Stalin was unsettled the Carabas
growing popularity and ordered his
assassination and he used Kirov's death
as a pretext to find his supposed
killers in what would come to be known
as the great purge Stalin ordered the
eradication of anyone considered a
threat first targeting other party
members but sooner swept over all
branches of government many high-ranking
generals and officers from the Soviet
military were tortured into giving false
confessions and executed next was the
educated like writers artists doctors
and scientists attention was finally
to the lower classes as well regardless
of innocence and after the random it
came to a point to a mass murder was
committed just to meet quotas on
Stalin's lists by the end of it is
estimated that up to a million people
were killed or sent to the gulags it's
aftermath paralyzed the Soviet Union
with fear and paranoia
crushing any preconception to resist but
as much as these crackdown secured
Stalin's position they would have
disastrous consequences for him later of
the 22nd of June 1941 Nazi Germany and
its axis allies invaded the Soviet Union
catching its armed forces completely by
surprise at first Joseph Stalin couldn't
believe it in August 1939 he and Hitler
had signed the nazi-soviet pact with
both invading Poland later in September
but only Germany being made to
accountable for it by having war
declared upon them by France and Britain
aside from carving up Poland together
the pact meant to guarantee peace for at
least ten years and Stalin was convinced
that Hitler wouldn't be reckless enough
to open up a second front nor without
taking care of the British first so a
news broke of the attack Stalin was so
shocked by it that he locked himself
away for weeks and refused to talk to
anyone during that time the red army and
navy were fighting a losing battle the
Great Purge had Lymon ated many of its
best officers and the lack of effective
leadership and experience helped pave
the way for the axis advance eventually
Stalin snapped out of his depression and
in the early days of fighting - personal
control of his armed forces despite
having little battle experience and even
less strategic and staff work knowledge
aside from the gigantic casualties the
Red Army suffered there was a serious
problem with the badly led troops
retreating and deserting in huge numbers
to try and fix this stalin issued the
infamous order two to seven to
re-establish discipline and order in the
only way he knew how it instructed all
officers and men to take not one step
back disgraced soldiers and labor camp
inmates were conscripted to what were
known as penal battalions and sent to
the most dangerous part to the line in
large numbers they were thrown against
German defenses their sinister purpose
to act as human shields and protect the
more experienced and valuable soldiers
following behind and if an assaults
failed order 2 to 7 required units at
their rear the line to shoot all who
retreated Stalin figured that the choice
between German bullets and Soviets
bullets would better sway the men in
reality this cruel tactic did nothing
but waste precious manpower with
hundreds of thousands dying under his
command for month after month
Stalin's generals eventually convinced
him to rescind order 2 to 7 and stepped
down as commander arguing that fighting
and winning the war would be better left
in their hands and he should focus
instead on keeping the factories running
and being the geostrategic chess player
after years of exceptionally bloody
fighting that was markedly pitiless the
tide finally turned for the Soviet Union
the Red Army and Navy had fully
recovered from the early defeats and
were better equipped Soviet factories
worked around the clock to provide tanks
aircraft pele guns and ammunition
Stalin's aggressive efforts and
industrialization had become the key to
winning the war the Soviet Union was now
able to out produce Germany through a
war of attrition outnumbered and
outgunned the German Wehrmacht and his
axis allies retreated from Soviet soil
from Eastern Europe all the way and to
the Red Army were at the gates of Berlin
only after the capital was in complete
ruins the Germans eventually surrender
the Soviet Union had emerged victorious
in their Great Patriotic War but the
cost was far higher than all the other
Allied nations combined paid for with
over 25 million Soviet lives this figure
wasn't lost on Stalin in July 1945
President Harry Truman Prime Minister
Winston Churchill and Joseph Stalin
attended the Potsdam Conference to
discuss the future post-war Europe the
Allies expressed their wish to the
Communist leader to withdraw his troops
in the liberated countries of Eastern
Europe a return to its people their
freedom but Stalin had no interest in
doing so and instead chose to absorb
these countries and turn them into
communist satellite states to create a
buffer zone between the west and the
and ensure that the Soviet Union would
never again be so easily invaded when
push came to shove the Allies and have
the nerve to get caught up and yet
another war and reluctantly abandoned 90
million people under Soviet occupation
to their fate upon returning to Moscow
Stalin wasted no time in reasserting his
authority nearly three million former
Soviets prisoners of war had survived
the horrific conditions of the Nazi and
AXYZ camps only to face interrogation
back home but charges of treason after
half were convicted and sent to the
gulags not even in his old age did
Stalin soften but time
his reign of terror continued to hold
the Soviet people hostage for another
eight years in his never-ending quest to
find traitors but under Stalin's vision
the Soviet Union had been transformed
into a superpower and its communist
ideology were play on the center stage
of world politics for the next
half-century
you
when the movie begins in this 1953 and
the people of the Soviet Union have
endured decades of oppression by
Stalin's secret police which monitored
and watched what everyone said or did in
order to survive his strict code of
silence was followed as he never knew
who you could trust or who might turn
you in even so this didn't guarantee
your safety
since many innocent people still ended
up on Stalin's lists the terrifying
truth was that no one was safe and
that's exactly how Stalin liked it even
in the 70s no one would dare challenge
his grip on power or even think to defy
him but in an ironic twist of fate they
would all come back to bite him in the
ass on the first of March 1953 the
general secretary was alone in his
bedroom and instructed his staff not to
disturb him shortly afterwards The
Dictator suffered a severe stroke and
violently collapsed and what happened
next is absolutely true investigate fuck
up before you get us both killed
despite hearing suspicious noise the
guards were too scared to check the
disturbance leaving their great
communist leader to line a pathetic
puddle of his urine for an entire day
when his staff eventually worked up the
courage they found it unconscious Stalin
and debated over what to do rather than
calling a doctor they decided to call
the Politburo instead the Communist
Party's Executive Committee with the
general secretary incapacitated it was
up to them to take charge in his absence
now the reason why a doctor wasn't
called for help first is thanks to yes
another of Stalin's genius policies we
should get a doctor yeah
yes if only we hadn't put away all those
highly competent doctors for treason
just a year earlier 1952 Stalin had
begun planning another purge one that
would specifically target Jews known as
the doctors plot Jewish doctors were
accused of conspiring to murder Stalin
and other Soviets leaders ostracized by
an aggressive propaganda campaign
hundreds of Moscow's doctors lost their
jobs and were rounded up tortured and
waited exile to a new series of gulags
that Stalin was planning to build just
for them and seeing the doctors plot
through was something that Stalin
adamantly believed in this of course
presents a dilemma for the committee if
they got the help of a highly skilled
doctor which many of the Jewish doctors
were and Stalin recovered then he might
perceive the act as treason after much
delay a group of doctors was eventually
assembled but there was little they
could do The Dictator had suffered a
cerebral hemorrhage and died a few days
later on the 5th of March 1953 for the
first time in decades the Politburo was
without Stalin's guidance a reality that
unnerved some party members whilst
others saw an opportunity after the
executive committee three would emerge
in the power struggle that followed
Stalin's death the first was the deputy
general secretary Georgy Malenkov and
his position within the party made him
next in the line of succession a role
that he didn't hesitate to pursue but he
was also aware that holding it wasn't a
guarantee he's irreplaceable exacting
general secretary I must step up I must
I must take his place while he's up on
the floor who just said he's a
replaceable Malakoff knew that his claim
meant very little with that support from
the other party members unless he had
some serious muscle backing him the
second person was the former head of the
NKVD Lavrentiy Beria he had been largely
responsible for murdering millions in
Stalin's purges and oversaw many of the
names from that dreaded list to her
before him but make sure he sees it on
this one
kill him take him to his church dump him
in the pulpit leave the rest up to you
barrier was a total psychopath and
relished the power that came with his
previous role a Stalin's personal
executioner who once referred to barrier
as my Himmler barrier also sadistically
enjoys beating and raping hundreds of
women and little girls this reputation
made him the second most feared man in
the Soviet Union and is most hated but
no longer under Stalin's protection the
crimes he had committed in his name had
become a liability and if he wanted to
survive
berea had to immediately take the reins
left behind in this power vacuum and
ally himself with Mallon cough and
finally the third person was Moscow
party head Nikita Khrushchev the very
last man anyone suspected would make a
power move up until now he had never
been particularly ambitious
or seen as anything special some party
members thought that the only reason
Khrushchev was even part of the inner
circle was simply because Stalin thought
he was funny it was crunch me out this
one despite appearing as the party clown
Khrushchev treated every joke he ever
told with absolute seriousness and just
like we see in the film he would ask his
wife at the end of the day to write down
all the jokes he could remember telling
Stalin and made a joke about the farmers
no more Navy jokes Khrushchev strokey
demeanor had always been a strategic
move and as long as he kept his head
down and stayed in Stalin's favor then
he had a good chance of surviving but
with Stalin gone that was no longer a
guarantee especially if his rival
barrier assumed power through the
weak-minded Mallen cough as the three
men plotted and schemed there was
another matter they had to deal with
Stalin's children specifically Svetlana
and Vasily from Stalin's second marriage
gaining their support would be paramount
in winning over the public it was just a
matter of who could get to them first
started
that of all of Stalin's children his
favorite was his only daughter Svetlana
she was the only thing in his life that
he showed an ounce of affection towards
and despite being a strict father his
reasons for being so controlling is most
likely due to Svetlana's mother Nadia
who died in 1932 what's happened was
that Nadia found out about the famine
sweeping through Ukraine and southern
Russia and on the 8th of November 1932
she confronted Stalin at a dinner party
and publicly accused him of betraying
the Soviets people in response he mocked
and humiliated her by flicking her with
his cigarette stubs in devastation
anteus stormed out of the banquets
locked herself in a bedroom and shot
herself in the head Svetlana would
inherit two mothers gentle nature and as
a result she was loved dearly by the
Soviets people unlike her brother Vasily
he was regarded as a major embarrassment
to the Stalin family he was a spoiled
egotistical drunk who beat his wife and
screwed up every job his father ever
gave him Vasily was also unpredictable
with his behavior and violently acted
out if I see who your father is hiding
the spoils leave his brain alone how old
are you
so with Stalin now dead the first thing
the committee saw too was organizing a
state funeral just like with Lenin
Stalin's body was to be embalmed for
display at the Hall of columns for the
next three days before his coffin would
be taken to his final resting place in
Lenin's Mausoleum
whilst all this was going on mariya
wasted no time in gathering power
firstly Barre worked out a deal with
Malin cough to reappoint him his head at
the MBD which he then merged the MGB
which would later be replaced by the KGB
in 1954
anyway this gave him power over the
Soviet Union's secret police which Jiri
staffed with his followers shortly after
he moved to MBD divisions into Moscow
and replaced the Red Army soldiers
standing guard this alarms the executive
committee who
represented as the planning stages of a
potential coup it also didn't help when
barrier began proposing some rather
controversial reforms such as halting
mass arrests reducing lengthy prison
sentences and even releasing a million
political prisoners this proposal was
adopted despite the fact that barrier
was responsible for most of these
victims
it seemed that this kind act was just so
barrier could distance himself from
Stalin's regime and the crimes he
committed in his name the Politburo grew
even further suspicious after an
uprising occurred in East Germany in
June 1953 who was where barrier proposed
the idea of reuniting East and West
Germany for American compensation in
Khrushchev sighs to even suggest this
idea was anti-communist and felt that
unless something was done soon they were
all in danger faced with this he began
hatching a plot in order for it to
succeed he knew he had to get help from
the Army at great risk
krutov confided in his old friend
marshal Zhukov a highly decorated war
hero whose great name would provide the
legitimacy he desperately needed I'm
gonna have to report this conversation
threatening to do harm or obstruct any
member of Presidium in the process of
looking first so you win I mean I'm in
fuckin thinks they can take on the Red
Army
I thought Germany I think I can take a
flesh lump in a fucking waistcoat
overtime Khrushchev gathered support
from all the party members he was even
able to recruit barriers Al I'm Alan
cough on the 26th of June 1953 the
Politburo assembled for a meeting
unknown to barrier zu kaufen a group of
armed men waiting nearby to arrest him
Khrushchev then proposed a motion for
barriers dismissal from the party as an
anti-communist and a Western
collaborator barrier was stunned by the
accusation and very quickly things
escalated before the vote could even be
counted Malan coughed panicked and
frantically hit the buzzer hiding
beneath his desk at the signal Zhukov
and his men burst into the room and took
Barry into custody a few months later he
was brought before a special tribunal
without representation or right to
appeal he was charged and sentenced to
death for treason so many times before
barrier had been on the other side and
condemned countless of innocents to
their deaths
the tables are turned barrier fell to
his knees weeping and begs for his life
[Applause]
there would be no ceremony for Stalin's
Himmler his remains were cremated and
buried in the woods near Moscow having
eliminated his greatest rival Khrushchev
was mostly left unchallenged and within
a few years he a stirred Malan cough and
demoted the other party leaders and by
1956 Khrushchev emerged as the new
leader of the Soviet Union and one of
his very first acts as leader was to
publicly condemn Stalin and what would
be known as the secret speech on the
25th of February 1956 Khrushchev stood
before the 20th Communist Party Congress
and officially revealed the full scale
of Stalin's crimes information how many
were killed in his purges had been
suppressed for decades leaving any
rumors and speculations but nobody
imagined it could ever be this high that
tens of millions had perished at the
hands of the very man they had all been
conditioned to revere even after a
speech Khrushchev knew that the path
towards complete de-stalinization was an
arduous one the Man of Steel had cast a
long shadow during his life some even
now are still under its influence to
this day the overriding reason for this
is that the USSR did not crash down in
flames like the Third Reich it merely
fizzled out
[Music]
so now that I've covered the death of
Stalin's historical background let's
find out how accurate it actually is the
main thing you'll notice is that whilst
most of the film is based on real
history there's also a lot of creative
liberties taken with the timeline
sometimes real events that were
separated by months or even years
appears all take place within just a few
days I'll get more into this a little
bit later but for now here are the most
interesting things I found in my
research starting off with the concept
we see at the very beginning although
this is based on a real event it didn't
occur in the same line to Stalin stroke
in 1953 but way back in 1944 the story
goes that Stalin was listening to the
radio and heard a concert playing
Mozart's Piano Concerto number 23 and he
enjoyed it so much that he called Radio
Moscow to send him a recorded copy the
only problem was there was a live
broadcast and nothing had been recorded
leaving everyone the studio absolutely
terrified because if you value a life
the last thing you want to do is
disappoint Stalin so the director
decided that the only thing to do was to
replay the entire concerto record it and
just pray that Stalin did notice but
there meant more than simply
reassembling the original orchestra in
order for the acoustics to sound the
same a similar sized audience would be
needed as well nobody's gonna get killed
I promise you sit down do not defy me
sit your asses down despite what you see
here Stalin's real request didn't happen
right after the performance but much
later when everyone had already gone
home and the entire Orchestra had to be
woken up in the middle of the night and
rushed back to the studio to fill in for
the audience random civilians were
grabbed off the streets and were told to
sit in however this wasn't the only
problem facing the director for example
in the movie we see the conductor become
so terrified that he faints and knocks
himself out forced in the studio to find
a second replacement as soon as possible
which is kind of true but not exactly
what really happened was that the first
conductor was too scared to perform so
they had to find another the second
couldn't perform either because he was
too drunk leaving the third and final
conduct
who worked out just fine like you see
here they came to his house in the
middle of the night and brought him to
the studio still wearing his pajamas the
concerto was successfully recorded and
sent a starling without him ever been
the wiser I would also like to point out
that the pianist Maria yudina is based
on a real person and it was specifically
her solo that caught the dictators
attention and it moved him so much that
he just had to relist into it whilst is
true the Maria did indeed hate Stalin I
was publicly critical of him there are a
few discrepancies with her character for
example she did have to be bribed by the
director to repr form for 20,000 rubles
just because there'll be a dick move and
selfishly endangered the lives of her
fellow musicians the real story was that
the 20,000 rubles was actually a gift
given to her by Stalin when he received
the record along with a personal letter
singing her praises and instead of
showing appreciation maria chose to
stick to her principles are replied back
with the most shocking letter which we
see stalin in the movie read Joseph
Vissarionovich Stalin you have betrayed
our nation and destroyed its people I
pray for your end and ask the Lord to
forgive you tyrant now this isn't
exactly what Maria wrote but it's pretty
close the real letter wasn't as
provocative with its language but it did
have the same connotations here's what
Maria actually said I thank you for your
aid I will pray for you day and night
and ask the Lord to forgive your great
sins before the people and the country
the Lord is merciful and he'll forgive
you I gave the money to the church that
I attend even though this is tamer than
what we see in the movie is still took a
lot of balls for her to say that it
would certainly be more than enough to
have a shot in the film Stalin doesn't
get that chance because he immediately
collapses from his stroke but the real
Stalin had plenty of time to react to
this defiance at first he read the
letter aloud who is in the circle who
were more than willing to have this
pianist arrested but what happened
instead was that Stalin decided to put
the letter aside and the subject was
just dropped the thing was that Maria
yudina
was Stalin's favorite pianist and he
just couldn't bring himself to kill her
and it's said that years later
Maria's concerto was heard on Stalin's
record player as he lay there dying next
let's talk about the dinner party scene
was
in a circle and I'm happy to say that
this is absolutely true the party elite
would regularly meet a Stalin's Country
Estate his dacha in the early hours of
the morning to discuss politics and
state business but even after they were
finished
Stalin encouraged them to stay and keep
drinking which of course they always did
because you never say no to Stalin and
they would get absolutely plastered much
to the dictator's amusement then Stalin
would end the day by having everyone sit
together in his home cinema and as we
see here the man was a huge film buff
his favorites were the John Ford
westerns but he also loves gangster
movies too and no matter how drunk or
exhausted his fellow comrades were they
wouldn't leave until the movie was over
another interesting scene I thought I'd
mention is when we're introduced to
vasily stalin is shown looking drunk and
rather pathetic coaching what appears to
be an amateur ice hockey team and the
reason given is pretty funny yes he most
certainly did this little story is also
pretty accurate Vasily Stalin was
president of the Soviet Sports Club BVS
Moscow which represented the Soviet Air
Force and on July 7th 1950 at plane
carrying his ice hockey team crashed in
a heavy snowstorm and apart from three
players who are not on board everyone
else was killed terrified with how
Stalin would react Vasily covered
everything up replaced the entire team
and prayed his dad in notice and
hilariously enough he never did the only
difference here is that the plane
crashed in the film appears to have
happened fairly recently whilst the real
one was just a few years before so
moving on from there we have the former
foreign minister vici Slav Molotov
despite being a loyal friend and
supporter of Stalin we are told that
years before the dictator had arrested
Molotov s-- wife Polina for bogus
charges of treason this is also fairly
accurate and happened in 1949 just like
a husband Polina was also a politician
and she befriended Golda Meir who
arrived in Moscow in November 1948 as
the first Israeli envoy to the USSR as
Polina was a Jew herself she took a role
very seriously and for that reason alone
stalin distrusted Polina even so she was
a fanatical communist that a first
question upon her release from the gulag
was how Stalin and when she was told to
he died only a few days before she
fainted and she and her husband remained
fervent communists to their dying days
so anyway one of the few things Stalin
shared in common with his former enemy
Adolf Hitler was his abiding hatred of
Jews and it didn't matter how many years
Paulina had devoted to the Communist
Party hers rail affiliation Hannah open
espousal the hand of the Crimea to
Soviet Jews was enough to give in Stalin
of an elaborate Zionist conspiracy
sentenced for exile Paulina would spare
the next five years with no contact with
her husband
Molotov was devastated of course but
those little he could do about it
to defend Paulina or pres Stalin risks
certain death so he dropped the matter
and continued serving the party there's
a scene where Molotov loudly denounces
her as a traitor and a criminal unaware
that she's just in the next room he
immediately drops the act when they're
reunited at least it seems like an act
because later on Molotov still continues
to slag off Polina behind her back
giving the impression that he's so
blinded by his loyalty to the party that
he can't accept his wife's innocence
which just isn't true
the real Molotov never stopped loving
his wife nor did he forget about her
throughout Paulina's exile he'd
regularly asked barrier for any news
about her well-being and it may also not
have been various idea to release
Pauline in the first place according to
journalist Douglas France on the 9th of
March the day of Stalin's funeral it
just so happened to be molotovs birthday
when Malakoff and Khrushchev wished him
happy birthday they asked her if there
was anything he'd like which Molotov
coldly replies give me back Polina and a
week later she was returned and the last
things I'll be covering are all about
Lavrentiy Beria since the few the film's
biggest inaccuracies seem to revolve
around him I should first point out that
by 1953 he wasn't head of Stalin's
secret police the NKVD he had been for
many years but resigned just before in
the ministry was disbanded in 1946 and
became the Ministry of Internal Affairs
the MBD barrier seemed a new role as
deputy chairman and had some say in
national security but nothing compared
to what he used to that's why when
Stalin dies one of the first things he
wanted to do
was get that back I think the reason why
it's never mentioned in the movie is
because they wanted to condense a lot of
complex history in order to keep the
plot moving the same thing goes with the
film's timeline we get the impression
that everything between Stalin's death -
buries execution all happened within a
brief amount of time instead of months
apart so for the purpose of pacing they
take a lot of creative liberties some of
it is harmless like when various steel
Stalin's personal files there's no
record of him ever doing this but it's
perfectly plausible unlike the other
stuff we see him do like the bear where
barrier orders a secret police to rest
all of stolen staff and to clear out
everything from his dacha seemingly to
get rid of evidence of witnesses and is
carried to such an extreme that even the
agents doing it are executed by other
agents now I'm not saying stuff like
this never happened but I've been unable
to find any evidence to this
specifically and to be honest I'm a
little confused as what the point of all
of this is it can't be to cover up
Stalin's death because it was publicly
announced the very next day if it was
just to steal stuff
I'm also unconvinced why would barrier
take such an unnecessary risk when he
had bigger fish to fry you might say
that was because the real barrier didn't
hide his hatred of Stalin when he died
and wasn't concerned with the
consequences which admittedly is true
and we do get a small glimpse of this in
the movie when we see bury a lean over
the dictators bed when everyone is gone
and whisper in his ear
but he might be surprised to find out
that the real barrier wasn't that subtle
while Stalin was unconscious barrier
began mocking him in front of everyone
and only stopped when Stalin briefly
regained consciousness which prompted
barrier to fall to his knees and kisses
hands begging for forgiveness but
apparently when Stalin passed out again
barrier stood back up and spat and
discussed if this is true then the shows
how competently bury a belief that
Stalin would die and could explain why
he looted the dacha in the movie again
I'm not convinced that this is true and
I couldn't find any evidence but if you
guys were able to I would love to read
your comments on this I should also
point out that in recent years some
people believe that Stalin may actually
have been poisoned by barrier the theory
goes that berry happened
formed that Stalin was secretly planning
to kill him so he acted first and
although this conspiracy theory isn't
featured in the death of Stalin I
thought you might find it interesting
all the same anyway so what else could
be said about barrier how about the
bit.we orders the NKVD to shut down all
the trains to Moscow to prevent Soviet
citizens from attending the funeral
which provokes Khrushchev to counterman
these orders and allow thousands of
mourners into the city unaware of this
the NKVD opens fire on the crowd and
kills 1500 civilians which does some
serious damage to barriers popularity
the massacre you see here never happened
the only thing true about it was that
was inspired by a tragic accident on the
8th of March 1953 crowds of mourners
were waiting outside the mausoleum to
see Stalin and the Red Square was so
overcrowded that people struggled to
breathe panic soon followed with
hundreds crushed to death in the chaos
so basically barrier had nothing to do
with this awful accident but it's
rewritten so he gets the blame from a
historical perspective this is wrong but
from a story standpoint I understand
although buried in Massacre civilians in
this circumstance and he wasn't head of
the NKVD as shown at the beginning of
the movie he did do all this stuff and
more back in the day in order to
understand just how much of a monster
barrier was the audience needs to
actually see it for themselves
and while the examples given may be
inaccurate at least they are
historically authentic
for this last chapter I'm going to talk
about how the death of Stalin was
received by the general public and also
as cautionary message it is first and
foremost a comedy of course and yet
despite a stark subject matter it
completely pulls it off there are so
many moments why not only cracked up
with laughter but was impressed with how
historically authentic the jokes were my
absolute favorite bit is at the funeral
where all the main characters stand in
front of Stalin's coffin
where they try to maintain appropriate
funeral etiquette but refused to stop
bitching at each other
Nikita why in God's are see if I get the
picture No I've already explained why
don't you tell him never mind
swap no just swap with me I said no we
can make it look like it's part of the
ceremony
[Music]
fuck as you could see the writing and
performances perfectly complement each
other and this might sound strange but I
love the fact that no one attempt a
Russian accent most actors compliment
off convincingly even some of the
greatest tend to over exaggerate like I
know many of you love Gary Oldman's
Russian accents in call of duty world of
war but even he will admit this pretty
silly due the fact that almost everyone
keeps the native accents actually makes
sense to me after all the Soviet Union
was an enormous landmass with hundreds
of unique regional accents so
representing them with variety of
english-speaking ones is rather fitting
I mean for example I found it hilarious
that Joseph Stalin's portrayed as a
cockney
it's rather appropriate given that he
spoke Russian with a thick Georgian
accent what took you so long a fucking
wolf here now delivering on the comedy
is one thing but the film also needed to
accurately portray just how repressive
life was under communism and to that
extent it succeeded it did so well in
fact that the death of Stalin wound up
getting banned in Russia the topic of
Stalin still seems to be a controversial
issue and has left some Russians feeling
divided one example of this could be
seen when two Russian journalists got
into an argument about the death of
Stalin they first began by discussing
the film but then the topic turned into
whether victory in the Second World War
should be credited to Stalin or to the
Soviets people and for yourself now a
funny thing to know is that the Kremlin
used this little scrap to justify the
ban with the president press secretary
Dmitry Peskov saying like quote if these
dinosaurs can't keep their emotions in
check then what is there to say about
everyone else
this idea that Russians can't handle
watching the death of Stalin was echoed
by the culture ministry who banned it as
they felt it was an insulting mockery of
the Soviets past but I did
seemed to be the case for at least one
cinema on Moscow who defied the ban and
screened the movie to a full audience
most of whom didn't seem to mind
WW they aren't sure you Marvel was a
rising young new magua's Medusa you know
what that's really nice to hear I mean
hopefully this assures the Russian
government that they simply overreacted
and there's nothing to worry about
a Moscow cinema has been raided by
police after it showed the newly
released British film the death of
Stalin the theater went ahead despite
the movie being banned in Russia on
second thought never mind I would just
like to say thanks to a sponsor for
today's video Skillshare skill shares an
online learning platform with thousands
of classes from running a business
photography music production interior
design and much much more for the
curtains of the front comrade you want
ruched not proofs colliculus ruched not
ruched Rouge would you stop with this
their premier membership gives you
unlimited access to a wide selection of
high-quality classes so you can improve
your current skills learn new ones and
create something that others will love
with sharper cheekbones as requested
sharp not sharp sharp sharp
I would like
that one destroyed skill shares also
very affordable with an annual
subscription of less than $10 a month
and the first 500 people to sign up with
the history buffs link will get their
first two months for free so just go to
skl SH /s rebuffs
or click on the link in the description
box below well that about wraps it up my
name is Nichole Jess and thanks for
watching history buffs and remember if
you like the show help the channel grow
if you wish to support history buffs
then you can now do so and patreon and
as always let me know in the comment
section what you thought about the death
of Stalin and of course what historical
movie should I review next in the
meantime check out the history buffs
Twitter and Facebook pages for new
updates until then I'll see you next
time
[Music]